Title: Debian Fonts Task Force Packaging Policy
State: DRAFT
Date: 2011-05-05
Drivers: Rogério Brito <rbrito@ime.usp.br>
Abstract:
 Propose a file layout, set of conventions and best practices for packaging
 fonts in the Debian Operating System.

# Introduction

The intention of this document is to serve as a basis on how packages
providing fonts should behave in a Debian-based system, to ensure good
interoperability with other programs.

Regarding the scope of this document, for the packaging of fonts in Debian,
the [Debian Policy][DP] serves as the general rule of how the system has to
behave. We state here only aspects that are specific to the packaging of
fonts.

This policy is a work in progress and any contributions (clarifications,
details, corrections) are welcome. Please, send feedback to the
[pkg-fonts-devel][PFD] mailing list or to [Rogério Brito][RB].  It is
appreciated if the suggestion is sent in the form of a patch, although this
is not a requirement.

# TODO

* See the work that Fedora has already done.
* See the discussions in the pkg-fonts-devel.
* Take non-Latin scripts into account (need natives help here).
* Fill in the sections that are not complete.
* Correct inaccuracies.
* Replace vague assertions with well-founded references.
* Copy-edit.

# Definitions

> The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
> "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
> document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119][RFC2119].

For the purposes of this document, we assume some familiarity with computer
fonts and we seek only to standardize the language, not to provide precise
definitions (especially because some of the concepts are not Mathematically
formalizable).

We establish the language to be used and, for this, we define, below, terms
used regarding fonts:

*Alphabet:* an alphabet is a non-empty finite set, whose elements are called
*symbols* or *letters*.

*Word:* a sequence of symbols.

*Glyph:* an "atomic" representation of the written language. Usually, a
glyph is the drawing of a symbol, or a letter, but it may also be the
aglutination of a sequence of symbols for typographic purposes (e.g., a
ligature).

*Typeface:* a set of glyphs that are aesthetically part of a "family" and
which compose a 

*Font:* an "implementation" of the abstract concept of a typeface.

*Foundry:* the "maker(s) or implementer(s)" of a font.

# Contents of packages

For the packaging of fonts in Debian, the Debian Policy serves as the
general rule of how the system has to behave. We state here only aspects
that are specific to the packaging of fonts.

The Debian operating system uses [fontconfig][FC] and [freetype][FT] as its
primary manipulators of fonts (regular TeX engines, and older
implementations of the X Window System being two of the notable exceptions).

In Debian, the font files recognized by fontconfig can be placed either in a
system-wide or in a user-specific location.  Packages provided in Debian
MUST install fonts in a system-wide location, under the directory hierarchy
`/usr/share/fonts`.

# Naming of font packages

The naming of package fonts depends on whether they are *source* packages or
*binary* packages, as defined by the Debian Policy.

## Naming of source packages

Source packages that contain fonts MUST be named in the form of a tuple,
with the possibilities being `fonts`-*name* or `fonts`-*foundry*-*name*,
with *foundry* and *name* described below.

Regardless of the form used for the name of the source package, the final
form MUST consist of lowercase Latin letters (`a-z`), digits (`0-9`), and
plus (`+`), minus (`-`) and dots (`.`) to be compliant with the Debian
Policy.

As for fonts it is expected that the names employed be unrestricted to use
scripts other than the Latin alphabet, it MAY be the case of the use of the
transliteration.

* *foundry* is the name of the foundry of the particular fonts being
  packaged.

  Any space in the name of the foundry MUST be removed, with the OPTIONAL
  use of of minus signs, at the option of the packager.
  
* *name* is the name of the font (or fonts) included in the package.

  For source packages that include fonts from one or more families, it is
  RECOMMENDED (though not mandatory) that separate source packages be
  created for each family, for ease of installation by the users.
  
  *name* SHOULD be the preferred name, as established by *foundry*, without
  specific qualifications such as shapes (e.g., upright, italic,
  oblique/slanted, condensed etc.), weights (e.g., light, extra-light,
  medium, book, bold, extra-bold, black etc.), features (e.g., stylistic
  alternates, oldstyle figures etc), or similar variations.
  
  In general, the name to be used as *name* can be obtained as the first
  part (that is, before any colon) of the output of the command `fc-list`
  for the particular fonts in question.

## Naming of binary packages

Binary packages that contain fonts MUST be named in the form of a tuple,
with the possibilities being *type*-*name* or *type*-*foundry*-*name*, with
*foundry* and *name* described as in the subsection "Naming of source
packages".  The *type* part of the naming of the package is one of the
following, at the moment:

* `ttf`: For TrueType fonts, independent of the fact that they support
  OpenType extensions.

* `ps`: For PostScript fonts, regardless if they are Type1, Type3 or any
  other type allowed by the PostScript standard.

* `otf`: For OpenType fonts, independent if they contain cubic (i.e.,
  PostScript) splines, quadratic (i.e., TrueType) splines, bitmapped parts
  or any other allowed extension by the OpenType standard.

# Types of fonts

In a very brief fashion, the fonts that we deal with commonly are basically
of two types:

* *Bitmapped fonts:* fonts whose glyphs are drawn at a fixed size by a fixed
  glyph specified by the author of the font. These fonts are usually shipped
  in files with extensions like `pcf` (possibly compressed), `fon`, `mf`
  (with their corresponding `tfm`).

* *Outline fonts:* fonts whose glyphs' *borders* are specified by formulas
  and are transformed, at the time of use by the user, as a region filled by
  some color delimited by those borders. These include PostScript Type1 (in
  set of files with extensions `afm`, `pfm`, `pfb`), TrueType (in files with
  extensions `ttf` or `otf`), and OpenType fonts (in files with extensions
  `otf`).
   
There are other kinds of fonts (like, for instance, stroked fonts, fonts
mixed with both bitmaps and outlines---examples of the latter are Anonymous
Pro, and some versions of Microsoft's Cleartype fonts), but those listed
above are our focus, for the moment.

## Location of fonts in the filesystem structure of a Debian system

The files corresponding to a given font are installed in directories
dependent on the type and name of the font.

The fonts MUST be stored in a directory named according to the scheme

    /usr/share/fonts/fonttype/[foundry/]name

where:

* *fonttype* is the type (OpenType, TrueType, PostScript etc.) being
  packaged, in lowercase.
* *foundry* is the foundry of the fonts.
* *name* is the family name of the fonts to be installed, with any suffixes
  like `font` or `fonts` removed.

It is OPTIONAL the use of the directory part containing the foundry of the
fonts.

Each element of the path SHALL be transliterated and converted to lowercase
to latin letters. It is RECOMMENDED that the files containing the fonts can
retain the preferred names specified by the original authors.

As examples, the [SIL Gentium][SG] fonts, which are distributed in TrueType
format SHOULD be put in the directory

    /usr/share/fonts/truetype/sil/gentium/

while the [Linux Libertine][LL] distributed in OpenType format SHOULD be put
in the directory:

    /usr/share/fonts/opentype/linux-libertine/

Notice that when the font does not have a unique, easily distinguished
foundry (e.g., when the font is the work of many persons under no
coordinated project or effort), but the font qualifies as Free Software
according to [Debian's Free Software Guidelines][DFSG], the foundry can be
omitted or taken as the word `free`.

## Location of fonts to be used with the TeX typesetting system

FIXME: Fill this in.

# Generation of binary packages

To preserve the forms of the fonts as intended by the original authors,
packagers MAY opt, for fonts distributed in a final, usable form (e.g.,
`.ttf`, `.otf` etc.), to ship those files in the binary packages, without
any build step.

For packages that only provide sources in [Fontforge][FF]'s format, custom
scripts MAY be used, if upstream does not provide them.

Despite the suggestion of shipping fonts that are as close as possible to
what upstream ships, some manipulation is allowed and even encouraged, for
the removal of glyphs for reduction of the size to fit in installation
media.

In any case, the package SHOULD clearly state that the font was manipulated
in the `README.Debian` file of the generated binary package.


[DFSG]: http://www.debian.org/social_contract
[DP]: http://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/
[FC]: http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/fontconfig
[FF]: http://fontforge.sf.net/
[FT]: http://www.freetype.org/
[LL]: http://linuxlibertine.sf.net/
[PFD]: mailto:pkg-fonts-devel@lists.alioth.debian.org
[RB]: mailto:rbrito@ime.usp.br
[RFC2119]: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt
[SG]: http://scripts.sil.org/Gentium
